---
layout: default
title:  "2018 SPDK US Summit Agenda"
---

<div class="well">
<h3><a href="http://www.cvent.com/d/qgqnn3">Register Now</a></h3>
<p>
2018 Storage Performance Development Kit (SPDK) Summit<br/>
May 15th -16th<br/>
Dolce Hayes Mansion, San Jose<br/>
<a href="https://goo.gl/maps/mj9sYL9Un232">200 Edenvale Ave, San Jose, CA 95136</a><br/>
<a href="http://www.hayesmansion.com">http://www.hayesmansion.com</a>
</p>
</div>

# 2018 SPDK US Summit Agenda

## Color Key:

<table class="table table-bordered table-condensed" style="width:50%">
<tr class="info"><td>General</td></tr>
<tr class="success"><td>Storage Services</td></tr>
<tr class="danger"><td>Driver</td></tr>
<tr class="warning"><td>Network</td></tr>
<tr class="active"><td>Virtualization</td></tr>
</table>

## Day 1 - Morning

<table class="table table-bordered table-hover">
<colgroup>
<col width="10%"/>
<col width="20%" />
<col width="20%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Time Slot</th>
<th>Title</th>
<th>Presenter</th>
<th>Abstract</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>8:45-9:15</td>
<td>Sign-in</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>9:20-9:30</td>
<td>Welcome</td>
<td>Nathan Marushak</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>9:30-10:00</td>
<td>There and Back Again: An Intel Storage Tale</td>
<td>Jennifer Huffstetler, Intel</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>10:00-10:30</td>
<td>SPDK: State of the Project</td>
<td>Jim Harris, Intel (SPDK team)</td>
<td>SPDK is a rapidly evolving project and has seen a lot of changes over the last year. This talk will review the significant
community and technical changes over the last year and provide insight into the short-term and long-term plans and goals
for the project.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="active">
<td>10:30-11:15</td>
<td>SPDK and Nutanix AHV: minimizing the virtualization overhead</td>
<td>Felipe Franciosi, Nutanix</td>
<td><p>Virtualizing storage platforms whilst maintaining high standards of performance has been a long-term challenge for all
hypervisors. The added software overhead involved in access validations, general data movement and notification between
domains become more and more noticeable as physical devices get faster. That affects all sorts of performance dimensions
including bandwidth, IOPS and latency, most of which have been vastly hidden by the slow nature of storage devices until
recently.</p>

<p>This talk will discuss the performance challenges involved in storage virtualization. It will discuss how AHV, Nutanix’s own
KVM-based hypervisor, has addressed most of these challenges. It will conclude showing how SPDK is being leveraged to
minimize the overhead to record lows. For that, it will focus on some of the hardest of benchmarks and show how AHV
allows virtual machines to access 3DXP NVMe devices in under 10us for 4k requests.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="active">
<td>11:15-11:45</td>
<td>Vhost-NVMe: A New
Virtualization Solution to
Accelerate Guest NVMe IOs</td>
<td>Changpeng
Liu, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td><p>The SPDK Vhost-NVMe target combines NVMe 1.3 new feature as well as vhost-user technology to
accelerate NVMe IOs inside Guest VM. It uses NVMe as the paravirtualization protocol between Guest and SPDK Vhost-
NVMe target. Also, no special paravirtualization driver is required inside Guest.</p>
This talk will include:
<ul><li>How Vhost- NVMe target works with the new protocol.</li>
<li>How it is implemented with vhost-user messages.</li>
<li>Benchmarks compared with QEMU NVMe and vhost solutions.</li>
<li>Future work about performance optimization.</li></ul></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>11:45-12:35</td>
<td>Lunch</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Day 1 - Afternoon

<table class="table table-striped table-bordered table-hover">
<colgroup>
<col width="10%"/>
<col width="20%" />
<col width="20%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Time Slot</th>
<th>Title</th>
<th>Presenter</th>
<th>Abstract</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="warning">
<td>12:35-1:15</td>
<td>NVMe over Fabrics</td>
<td>Akshay Shah, Oracle</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="warning">
<td>1:15-1:45</td>
<td>NVMe over Fabrics: Scaling Up
with the Storage Performance
Development Kit</td>
<td>Benjamin
Walker, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td><p>The SPDK project released an open source NVMe over Fabrics (NVMe-oF) software target in conjunction with release of the
NVMe-oF specification in 2016. This target has continued to evolve to ensure linear scaling with the addition of CPU cores,
NICs, and NVMe devices, all while maintaining the low latency characteristics of RDMA. This talk will address a number of
challenges encountered during this evolution of the SPDK NVMe-oF target including:</p>

<ul><li>Keeping connections independent from one another to enable a lock-free I/O path</li>
<li>Maintaining mutable NVMe subsystem state and cross-thread coordination</li>
<li>Effectively leveraging hardware features in RDMA NICs and Fibre Channel HBAs</li>
<li>Challenges created by the NVMe over Fabrics protocol itself</li></ul>

<p>Further, benchmarks will be presented showing scaling behaviors in the latest NVMe over Fabrics target against a range of
variables including the number of connections, the number of subsystems, and the number of NICs, CPU cores, and NVMe
SSDs.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="warning">
<td>1:45-2:30</td>
<td>Integrating VPP and SPDK:
TCP in userspace</td>
<td>Ed Warnicke,
Cisco
Daniel Verkamp,
Intel (SPDK
Development
team)</td>
<td>The SPDK iSCSI target provides high-performance network access to NVMe devices and other SPDK block devices, but its
network performance is limited by the use of the Linux kernel TCP/IP stack. Beginning with the SPDK v18.04 release,
optional integration with the VPP userspace TCP/IP stack allows SPDK to take advantage of the extra performance and
better efficiency of DPDK network drivers. This talk will provide background on what VPP is and how it works, as well as
details on how VPP is integrated with the SPDK iSCSI target (and upcoming NVMe over Fabrics target TCP transport).</td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>2:30-2:45</td>
<td></td>
<td>Alibaba</td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2:45-3:15</td>
<td>Break</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="danger">
<td>3:15-3:45</td>
<td>Open Channel SSDs: Extending
SPDK’s Reach</td>
<td>Jim Harris
(SPDK team)
John Rudelic,
Intel</td>
<td>Open Channel SSDs provide host software more control over SSD flash media by moving media access and management
logic from SSD firmware into the host application. This talk will provide Intel’s insights and plans for this exciting new
standard and the SPDK Project’s plans for supporting Open Channel SSDs in its NVMe polled mode driver.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>3:45-4:15</td>
<td>SPDK & PMDK: Two Open Source
Development Kits for The
Evolving NVM Landscape</td>
<td>Paul Luse, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td>The Persistent Memory Develop Kit (PMDK) is an open source project for programming persistent memory
(http://pmem.io). As persistent memory becomes more prevalent, the interaction between traditional block-based storage
and persistent memory has become a hot topic. In this talk, we’ll provide a brief overview of PMDK and how it contrasts
with SPDK. Further, we’ll cover how the two work together to move data between persistent memory and block storage.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>4:15-4:45</td>
<td>Disaggregated storage and role of
storage stack</td>
<td>Manoj Wadekar, eBay</td>
<td>Hyper scale data centers such as clouds, social networks, and large e-commerce sites, are using ever-larger amounts of
flash memory to achieve the required throughput and latency at minimal cost. At the same time – defining servers with
balanced CPU/Memory/Storage ratios is becoming difficult. Disaggregating storage from CPUs can provide flexibility of the
eBay
design. However, this requires very high performance storage stacks to deliver flash storage over network. Can SPDK live
up to that promise?</td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>4:45-5:15</td>
<td>Virtual BDEVs: The Secret to
Customizing SPDK</td>
<td>Paul Luse, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td>The Block Device Layer provides an abstraction of a block device within SPDK. It’s what makes it possible to route I/O from
one of the network protocol front ends to a variety of block-based back-ends. The block device abstraction additionally
provides a mechanism to create virtual block devices, which are block devices that forward their I/O to other block devices.
The most familiar virtual block devices are SPDK’s logical volumes and split devices. This talk will explain the design of
virtual block devices, detail the recently added Pass thru virtual block device example, and outline how to implement a
custom virtual block device.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5:15</td>
<td>Reception (Happy Hour)</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Day 2 - Morning

<table class="table table-striped table-bordered table-hover">
<colgroup>
<col width="10%"/>
<col width="20%" />
<col width="20%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Time Slot</th>
<th>Title</th>
<th>Presenter</th>
<th>Abstract</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>8:30-9:00</td>
<td>Sign-in, Welcome</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>9:00-9:30</td>
<td>SPDK Logical Volumes: It
Slices, It Dices</td>
<td>Daniel Verkamp, Intel (SPDK team)</td>
<td>The SPDK logical volume subsystem enables dynamic, high-performance provisioning of block devices. This talk will dive  into the internals of the logical volume layer to explain how it is architected for performance (including a brief introduction to the SPDK blobstore and how it is used to implement logical volumes) and coverage of new logical volume features added
in recent releases, including thin provisioning, resizable volumes, and snapshots.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>9:30-10:00</td>
<td>QoS: IOPS Rate Limiting on
SPDK Common Bdev and
vBdev</td>
<td>Gang Cao, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td><p>The SPDK bdev module creates the abstraction layer for the common block device to support any type of the device
underneath like NVMe, RAM-disk, AEP, Ceph RBD and so on. Upon this common bdev, QoS IOPS rate limiting has been
enabled on the optimized mechanism like multiple and lockless queues. To work with the frontend storage protocols like
NVMe-oF, iSCSI and vhost, the QoS has also extended to the per client from the per bdev based on the vbdev which is
created on the existing bdev. This talk will cover:</p>

<ul>
<li>Introduction on how the bdev works with multiple and lockless queues</li>
<li>Details on the implementation and work flow of QoS rate limiting on bdev</li>
<li>How to support the per client QoS on vbdev</li>
<li>Future work of QoS rate limiting on the bdev and vbdev</li></ul></td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>10:00-10:30</td>
<td>A match made in userspace
heaven: ISA-L, DPDK Framework, & SPDK Virtual
Block Devices</td>
<td>Paul Luse, Prital
Shah, Greg
Tucker, Intel
(SPDK and ISA-L
team)</td>
<td>Storage systems are frequently being asked to not just move data but operate directly on data to transform, compress,
encrypt or analyze on the fly. Employing these algorithms in a virtual block device is the perfect place to extend
functionality in SPDK to do data-dependent operations. The Intelligent Storage Acceleration Library (ISA-L) provides highly
optimized implementations of the key algorithms for storage applications such as CRC, RAID, erasure codes, encryption,
hashing and compression. In this talk we will discuss the roadmap of ISA-L, the DPDK acceleration framework and other
methods to implement your high computational I/O needs.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>10:30-10:45</td>
<td>Break</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="success">
<td>10:45-12:15</td>
<td>SPDK Lab: Supercharge your application with virtual bdevs. Vroom!</td>
<td>John Kariuki,
Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td>Come learn how to build a virtual bdev. In this lab, we will provide an overview of the vbdev_passthru module that provides
a template for building your first virtual bdev. Please bring your laptop with the SPDK Vagrant Development Environment
set up so that you can partake in the hand-on exercises.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>12:15-1:00</td>
<td>Lunch</td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Day 2 - Afternoon

<table class="table table-striped table-bordered table-hover">
<colgroup>
<col width="10%"/>
<col width="20%" />
<col width="20%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Time Slot</th>
<th>Title</th>
<th>Presenter</th>
<th>Abstract</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="info">
<td>1:00-1:30</td>
<td>APIs, ABIs, and Packaging</td>
<td>Benjamin
Walker, Intel
(SPDK team)</td>
<td>As SPDK matures as a toolkit and the interfaces stabilize, defining a strategy for API and ABI compatibility is critical. Further,
as the size and scope of the user base increases, there is additional demand to consume SPDK as a set of binary packages
instead of as source. This talk will discuss the current state of SPDK's release and packaging process and then enumerate a
set of proposals to be applied to future releases. Open discussion and feedback is welcome for each of the topics
presented.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="info">
<td>11:45-12:35</td>
<td>Developer Meetup</td>
<td>Paul Luse, Jim
Harris,
Intel(SPDK
team)</td>
<td>The developer meet up time is a chance for active contributors to spend some time face to face to make additional
progress on items they are currently work on. Activities can include everything from white board design discussions to code
reviews. There’s no preset agenda, we will break into as many small groups as needed depending on hot topics.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>