---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK 17.07 Release: Build system improvements, userspace vhost-blk target, and GPT bdev"
author: Daniel Verkamp
categories: release
---

The SPDK team is proud to announce the [v17.07 release](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v17.07).
This release incorporates a number of ease-of-use improvements and API cleanups.

# Build System

A `configure` script has been added to simplify the build configuration process.
The existing CONFIG file and `make CONFIG_...` options are also still supported.
Run `./configure --help` for information about available configuration options.

A DPDK submodule has been added to make building SPDK easier.  If no `--with-dpdk`
option is specified to configure, the SPDK build system will automatically build a
known-good configuration of DPDK with the minimal options enabled.  See the Building
section of README.md for more information.

A [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) setup has been added to make it easier to
develop and use SPDK on systems without suitable NVMe hardware.  See the Vagrant
section of README.md for more information.

# Userspace vhost-blk target

The vhost library and example app have been updated to support the vhost-blk
protocol in addition to the existing vhost-scsi protocol.
See the [vhost documentation](http://www.spdk.io/doc/vhost.html) for more details.

# Block device abstraction layer (bdev)

A GPT virtual block device has been added, which automatically exposes GPT partitions
with a special SPDK-specific partition type as bdevs.
See the [GPT bdev documentation](http://www.spdk.io/doc/bdev.md#bdev_config_gpt) for
more information.

In support of the GPT bdev, a new virtual bdev "examine" interface has been added to
the bdev module API.  This allows bdev modules to check if a newly-added bdev
contains a specific on-disk format, such as a GPT partition table, and gives them the
ability to export virtual bdevs as desired.

# NVMe driver

The NVMe driver has been updated to support recent Intel SSDs, including the Intel®
Optane™ SSD DC P4800X series.

A workaround has been added for devices that failed to recognize register writes
during controller reset.

The NVMe driver now allocates request tracking objects on a per-queue basis.  The
number of requests allowed on an I/O queue may be set during `spdk_nvme_probe()` by
modifying `io_queue_requests` in the opts structure.

The SPDK NVMe `fio_plugin` has been updated to support multiple threads (`numjobs`).

`spdk_nvme_ctrlr_alloc_io_qpair()` has been modified to allow the user to override
controller-level options for each individual I/O queue pair.
Existing callers with qprio == 0 can be updated to:
~~~
... = spdk_nvme_ctrlr_alloc_io_qpair(ctrlr, NULL, 0);
~~~
Callers that need to specify a non-default qprio should be updated to:
~~~
struct spdk_nvme_io_qpair_opts opts;
spdk_nvme_ctrlr_get_default_io_qpair_opts(ctrlr, &opts, sizeof(opts));
opts.qprio = SPDK_NVME_QPRIO_...;
... = spdk_nvme_ctrlr_alloc_io_qpair(ctrlr, &opts, sizeof(opts));
~~~

# Environment Abstraction Layer

The environment abstraction layer has been updated to include several new functions
in order to wrap additional DPDK functionality. See `include/spdk/env.h` for the
current set of functions.
