---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v18.10: Dynamic memory allocation, Crypto vbdev, jsonrpc-client, SPDKCLI iSCSI and NVMe-oF support"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 18.10](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v18.10)!

This release contains the following new features:

- **Dynamic memory allocation:** SPDK will now automatically utilize DPDK's dynamic memory management with DPDK versions >= 18.05.1.
- **Crypto vbdev:** A new vbdev module for performing inline data encryption and decryption has been added. It is based on the DPDK cryptodev framework. It supports software encryption as well as hardware assisted encryption via Intel(R) QAT.
- **jsonrpc-client:** A C library for issuing RPC commands has been added.
- **SPDKCLI:** The interactive command-line tool for managing SPDK applications is no longer considered experimental. Support for the iSCSI and NVMe-oF targets has also been added.
- **iSCSI initiator:** The SPDK iSCSI initiator is no longer considered experimental.
- **RAID:** The RAID virtual bdev module is no longer considered experimental and is now enabled by default. RAID 0 is the only RAID level supported.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v18.10).

# New Contributors

This quarterly release contains 670 commits from 55 different authors. We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Avinash M N
- Chen Zhenghua
- Crane Chu
- Enming Zhang
- Li Feng
- Mike Altman
- Ni Xun
- Potnuri Bharat Teja
- Rami Rosen
- Sun Zhenyuan
- Takeshi Yoshimura
- Vitaliy Mysak
- Wael Halbawi
- Wuzhouhui

Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
