---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v18.04: Logical Volume Snapshot/Clone, iSCSI Initiator, Bdev QoS, VPP Userspace TCP/IP"
author: Prital Shah
categories: release
---

Today, the SPDK team is proud to announce the [v18.04 release](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v18.04).

This release contains the following new features:

- **iSCSI target integration with VPP Userspace TCP/IP:** The SPDK iSCSI target now supports the fd.io Vector Packet Processing (VPP) framework userspace TCP/IP stack.
- **Logical Volume Snapshot/Clone:** Users may create snapshots of existing logical volumes and clones of existing snapshots.
- **Bdev QoS:** Enforcement of IOPS limits for quality of service (QoS) has been added to the bdev layer. This capability will enable congestion management by throttling I/Os to block devices at the QoS rate.
- **Vhost:** The SPDK vhost-scsi, vhost-blk and vhost-nvme applications have fixes to address the DPDK rte_vhost vulnerability [CVE-2018-1059](http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=cve-2018-1059). Please see this [security advisory](https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/cve-2018-1059) for additional information on the DPDK vulnerability.
- **Unified Target Application:** A new unified SPDK target application has been added. This application combines the functionality of iSCSI target, NVMe-oF target, and vhost target.
- **Virtio Block device:** A userspace driver for Virtio Block devices has been added.
- **Virtio with 2MB hugepages:** Enables SPDK Virtio to work with 2MB hugepages.

Also, we have added the following experimental features:
- **iSCSI Initiator:** A SPDK iSCSI initiator bdev module has been added.
- **Vhost NVMe:** Support for vhost-nvme has been added to the SPDK vhost target.
- **SPDKCLI:** Interactive command tool for managing SPDK is available.
- **NVMe CMB:** Support for WDS and RDS capable CMBs in NVMe controllers has been added.
- **RPC:** Partial JSON configuration save/load support has been added to several subsystems.

# Contributors

Thanks to everyone who contributed patches to the SPDK v18.04 release:

Andrey Kuzmin
Ben Walker
Changpeng Liu
Chen Long
Chen Wang
Cunyin Chang
Daniel Verkamp
Dariusz Stojaczyk
Ed Rodriguez
Ehud Naim
GangCao
Hailiang Wang
Huagen Xu
Jim Harris
John Kariuki
Jonathan Richardson
Karol Latecki
Lance Hartmann
Liang Yan
Maciej Szwed
Pan Liu
param
Paul Luse
Pawel Kaminski
Pawel Niedzwiecki
Pawel Wodkowski
Piotr Pelplinski
Roman Sudarikov
Sebastian Basierski
Seth Howell
Shuhei Matsumoto
Slawomir Mrozowicz
Stephen Bates
Suman Chakraborty
Tomasz Kulasek
Tomasz Zawadzki
Wenzhong Wu
Xiaodong Liu
Yanbo Zhou
Young Tack Jin
Ziye Yang
Zahra Khatami
