---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v19.01.1: Maintenance Release"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 19.01.1](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v19.01.1)!

### logical volumes

Added option to change method for erasing data region on lvol store creation.
Default of unmapping can now be changed to writing zeroes or no operation.

### autotest

Introduce SPDK_RUN_FUNCTIONAL_TEST variable enabled by default, that can be
manually disabled on systems where e.g. only unit tests are run.

### FTL

Add detection for OpenChannel devices, so that NVMe tests and FTL bdev tests
are run on appropriate devices.

### QoS

Enabled rate limit when opening the bdev, as there were some cases where
previously closed bdev would have QoS disabled.

### GitHub issues

- **523:** (fio_plugin) Fixed hang on pthread_exit(NULL).
- **633:** (crypto bdev) Fixed memory leak in driver init path.
- **602:** (nvme bdev)  Will not attach user deleted controllers automatically.
- **676:** (nvme_bdev) Added SHST_COMPLETE quirk for VMWare emulated SSDs.
- **638:** (nvmf) Fixed the lvol creation failure issue for NVMe-oF TCP.
- **699:** (nvmf) Updated default number of shared buffers for RDMA.
- **673:** (vhost) Will use mmap_size to check for 2MB hugepage multiple.
- **663:** (building) Fixed duplicated clean target in shared_lib/Makefile
- **593:** (spdkcli) Will exit with 1 when rpc throws JSONRPCException.

Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
