---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v19.10: NVMe character devices, Zoned bdev API, Opal support"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 19.10](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v19.10)!

This release contains the following new features:

- **Zoned bdev API:** Zones are an extension of the bdev interface. The concept comes from ATA/SCSI and is currently being worked as an NVMe TP. Bdevs can now be queried to check for zone semantics.
- **Opal bdev:** A new opal bdev has been added to support management of NVMe self-encrypting drives through the Opal specification. This feature is considered experimental.
- **NVMe character device:** Added NVMe character device implementation based on CUSE library. It allows creation of NVMe device nodes in Linux kernel for the controller and namespaces (i.e. at /dev/nvmeXnY). These character devices can be used by tools such as nvme-cli. This feature is considered experimental.
- **Blobfs mount via RPC:** Added mounting blobfs to path on host via RPC.
- **OCF:** Added support for OCF v19.06. Added write-only, write-invalidate and write-around mode support.
- **DPDK:** Added support for DPDK 19.08.
- **RPC names:** Names of RPC calls streamlined between different components. Previous RPC names are available, but will be deprecated.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v19.10).

# New Contributors

This release contains 845 commits from 44 authors with over 44k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Benjamin Saunders
- Kay Bouché
- Marcin Dzięgielewski
- Michael Haeuptle
- Michal Ben Haim
- Tom Nabarro
- Yang Fan
- Yan Wang
- Yao Liu

Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
