---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v20.07: SPDK CSI driver, new accel_fw commands, I/O abort support"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 20.07](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v20.07)!

This release contains the following new features:

- **SPDK CSI driver:** Added CSI driver to bring SPDK to Kubernetes storage through NVMe-oF or iSCSI. Supporting dynamic volume provisioning and enabling Pods to use SPDK storage transparently. This feature is considered experimental. See [SPDK-csi](https://github.com/spdk/spdk-csi) repository for more details.
- **Acceleration Framework:** Added commands for compare, dualcast, crc32c, along with batching support for all commands in all plug-ins. See [accel_fw](https://spdk.io/doc/accel_fw.html) for detailed information.
- **I/O abort:** Added support for aborting I/O commands to NVMe, NVMe-oF and Bdev layers.
- **Env PCI drivers:** Added env APIs to provide greater flexibility in registering and accessing polled mode PCI drivers.
- **RDMA library:** Added `rdma` library providing an abstraction layer over different RDMA providers. Two providers available are verbs and mlx5 Direct Verbs.
- **spdk_dd:** Added an application for copying data to/from files and SPDK bdevs efficiently.
- **bdevperf config:** Added support for configuration files similar to FIO, to allow benchmarking more complex use cases. See [bdevperf](https://spdk.io/doc/bdevperf.html) for more details.
- **DPDK:** Added support for DPDK 20.05.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v20.07).

# New Contributors

This release contains 842 commits from 44 authors with over 44k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Dayu Liu
- Haichao Li
- Jörg Thalheim
- Kyle Zhang
- Monica Kenguva
- Ntsaravana
- Peng Yu
- Simon A. F. Lund
- Sochin Jiang
- Sven Breuner
- Wenhua Liu
- Yibo Cai

Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
