---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v20.10: NVMe-oF multipath, NVMe ZNS, iSCSI login redirection"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 20.10](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v20.10)!

This release contains the following new features:

- **NVMe-oF Multipath:** The NVMe-oF target now supports Asymmetric Namespace Access (ANA) reporting to provide multipath to NVMe-oF initiator.
- **NVMe ZNS:** Zoned Namespace Command Set support has been added to NVMe driver. See [nvme_zns.h](https://spdk.io/doc/nvme__zns_8h.html) for details.
- **iSCSI Login Redirection:** The iSCSI target supports iSCSI login redirection feature to achieve fault tolerance and load balancing particularly in scale out iSCSI target system.
- **Interrupt mode:** Added support for interrupt mode. It allows modules or libraries to selectively register file descriptors that the spdk_thread can wait on. This feature is considered experimental and enabled in a very small subset of SPDK libraries and modules.
- **Scheduler and governor:** Added thread scheduler and CPU frequency governor frameworks used to rebalance load among CPU cores. This feature is considered experimental.
- **Legacy configuration removed:** SPDK applications and bdev modules no longer support legacy INI style configuration. Only JSON-RPC configuration is supported, see [JSON-RPC](https://spdk.io/doc/jsonrpc.html) for details.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v20.10).

# New Contributors

This release contains 805 commits from 43 authors with over 47k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Jimbo Lu
- Krzysztof Karas
- Niklas Cassel
- Pawel Piatek
- Rafal Stefanowski
- Vasuki Manikarnike
- Wang Shilong


Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
