---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v22.09: FTL, xNVMe bdev, DAOS bdev, SMA crypto and QoS"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 22.09](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.09)!!

This release contains the following new features:

- **Flash translation layer:** The previous FTL library has been entirely replaced with a new version designed specifically to combine a fast cache device with a large backing device that requires large sequential writes, such as a zoned device.
- **xNVMe bdev:** Added a new bdev module that forwards I/O to the xNVMe library. Please see the [xNVMe documentation](https://spdk.io/doc/bdev.html#bdev_ug_xnvme) for more details.
- **DAOS bdev:** Added a new bdev module backed by DAOS. Please see the [DAOS documentation](https://spdk.io/doc/bdev.html#bdev_config_daos) for more details.
- **SMA crypto and QoS:** Expanded SMA with support for configuring crypto when attaching a volume and configuring QoS on per-device or per-volume level.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.09).

# New Contributors

This release contains 753 commits from 81 authors with over 97k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Amir Haroush
- Ankit Kumar
- Anton Eidelman
- Apokleos
- Artsiom Koltun
- Bin Yang
- Chen You
- Chuanwei Ji
- Damiano Cipriani
- Denis Barakhtanov
- Félix Piédallu
- Gong Wei
- Greg Inozemtsev
- Heinrich Schuchardt
- Indraneel Mukherjee
- Jonathan Davies
- Jun Ran
- Jun Zeng
- Kan Kuo
- Lewis Liu
- Liad Oz
- Luo Rixin
- Nathan Claudel
- Theo Jepsen
- Tongkunkun Yewu
- Xinrui Mao
- Yafei Wang


Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
