---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v22.05: SMA, accel_fw IAA, virtio-blk transport abstraction"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 22.05](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.05)!!

This release contains the following new features:

- **Storage Management Agent:** Added a service providing a gRPC interface for orchestrating SPDK applications. Please see [SMA documentation](https://spdk.io/doc/sma.html) for details.
- **Accelerator framework compression:** Added API for compress and decompress operations to the accelerator framework.
- **Accelerator framework IAA:** Added support for the Intel (R) Analytics Accelerator device.
- **RAID concat:** Added concat module to RAID bdev. This is a special RAID level that can add multiple underlying bdevs, extending the concat bdev size.
- **virtio-blk transport abstraction:** Added abstraction for creating virtio-blk transports, with the `vhost_user_blk` as the first one.
- **vfio-user interrupt coalescing:** Added adaptive interrupt feature for vfio-user transport. New parameter `disable_adaptive_irq` was added to the RPC `nvmf_create_transport`.
- **NVMe multipath:** Added support for active/active policy and selecting preferred I/O path.
- **NVMe-oF RDMA:** Added asynchronous qpair connect.


The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.05).

# New Contributors

This release contains 749 commits from 63 authors with over 39k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Alexis Lescouet
- Alex Michon
- Aviv Ben-David
- Boris Glimcher
- Chunsong Feng
- Duan Zhang
- Gal Hammer
- Gu Zhimin
- Jaroslaw Chachulski
- Jon Kohler
- Kamil Godzwon
- Lu Zhipeng
- Mike Gerdts
- Milosz Linkiewicz
- Samir Raval
- Sebastian Brzezinka
- Weiguo Li
- Xiaoxiang Zhang
- Yuriy Umanets
- Ziv Hirsch


Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
