---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v22.01: NVMe multipath, NVMe TCP zero-copy, NVMe-oF discovery service"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 22.01 LTS](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.01)!!
The SPDK 22.01 release is a long term support release that will be supported for 1 year.

This release contains the following new features:

- **NVMe bdev multipath:** Added support for NVMe-oF multipath to bdev nvme.
- **NVMe-oF TCP zero-copy:** Added zero-copy support to NVMe-oF TCP transport.
- **NVMe-oF discovery service:** Added discovery service to bdev nvme. Allowing to connect to current and future subsystems added to discovery controller.
- **IDXD transparent batching:** Introduced performance optimizations, including transparently grouping independent operations into IDXD batch operations.
- **vfio-user live migration:** Added experimental support for virtual machine live migration to vfio-user NVMe-oF transport.
- **iSCSI bdev resize:** Added automatic block device resize detection to iSCSI bdev module.
- **NVMe sparse namespaces:** Improved handling of subsystems with sparsely populated active namespaces.

The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v22.01).

# New Contributors

This release contains 534 commits from 49 authors with over 25k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Adam Aronov
- Ahriben Gonzalez
- Bartosz Blachut
- Josh Soref
- Kai Li
- Michael Piszczek
- Peng Lian
- Sergei Trofimovich
- Tan Long
- Wen Jun
- Wenliang Wang
- Yifan Bian


Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
