---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v23.01: accel chained ops, accel crypto, ublk target"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 23.01 LTS](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v23.01)!!
The SPDK 23.01 release is a long term support release that will be supported for 1 year.

This release contains the following new features:

- **Accelerator framework chained operations:** Added API for chaining multiple accel operations together and executing them all in a single call. This mode is supported in copy, decompress, decrypt, encrypt, and fill operations. This feature is considered experimental.
- **Accelerator framework encryption:** Added API for encrypt and decrypt operations to the accelerator framework. This feature can be used via accel_sw module with isa-l-crypto, and two new accel modules dpdk_cryptodev and mlx5.
- **ublk target:** Added ublk target that exposes any SPDK bdev as high-performance kernel block device. This feature is considered experimental. Please see [ublk documentation](https://spdk.io/doc/ublk.html) for details.
- **mDNS discovery:** Added support for Avahi based mDNS discovery service, as per NVMe TP 8009 - Automated Discovery of Ethernet Discovery Controllers.
- **iobuf buffer pool:** Added iobuf buffer pool API for allocating data buffers across SPDK libraries.
- **spdk spinlock:** Added spinlocks that are aware of the SPDK concurrency model. This feature is used in bdev layer to enforce that no internal bdev locks can be held when a poller or message goes off CPU. Consumers of the bdev API must be on an SPDK thread.
- **bdev io stats:** Added API for displaying per channel I/O statistics for required bdev, and display maximum and minimum latencies and I/O error counts.
- **NVMe bdev path stats:** Added I/O statistics per I/O path to the NVMe bdev module for NVMe bdev multipath.
- **SRQ in RDMA:** Added support for SRQ in RDMA transport of NVMe-oF initiator.
- **RAID I/O metadata:** Added support for extended sector sizes in raid bdev.
- **DPDK 22.11.1:** DPDK submodule has been updated to DPDK 22.11.1 LTS.
- **bdev copy I/O:** Added support for new bdev copy I/O type.


The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v23.01).
Deprecation notices for users updating from previous releases can be found [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/v23.01/deprecation.md).

# New Contributors

This release contains 826 commits from 75 authors with over 64k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

- Anton Eidelman
- Dennis Maisenbacher
- Fengnan Chang
- Gili Buzaglo
- Krystyna Szybalska
- Krzysztof Smolinski
- Liu Darong
- Li Zengwu
- Luo Yifan
- Melon Masou
- Michal Rozegnal
- Mykola Golub
- Parameswaran Krishnamurthy
- Pierre Lestringant
- Roger Liu
- Shua Lv
- Sijie Sun
- Sunil Shahu
- Szymon Kamuda
- Xinliang Liu
- Xin Yang
- Xue Liu
- Yue Zhu
- Yuhua


Thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
