---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v23.01.1: Maintenance Release"
author: Konrad Sztyber
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK v23.01.1](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v23.01.1).

## v23.01.1 LTS

### accel

Corrected the optional `key_name` parameters in `accel_crypto_keys_get` and
`accel_crypto_key_destroy` RPC commands.

Fixed SGL initialization in `dpdk_cryptodev` module when a task is processed in several iterations.

Fixed memory domain contexts not being copied when removing copy operations.

### bdev

Auxiliary buffer is now freed when crypto operation fails in bdev crypto (#2886).

Uring bdev no longer sets the `write_cache` flag, as it does not support flushing.

The `hdgst` and `ddgst` fields are now output when saving bdev NVMe config.

Fixed off-by-one error in maximum buffer size calculation when determining whether bdev layer can
allocate a buffer from the iobuf pool.

Crypto bdev no longer uses `spdk_bdev_queue_io_wait()` after receiving ENOMEM from accel.  Instead,
such IOs are completed with NOMEM status and bdev layer is responsible for retrying them.

### blob

Removed short-circuiting path for `blob_freeze` to ensure that if `blob_freeze_io()` is called twice
in a row, and the second time occurs before the `for_each_channel` for the first completes, the
second caller will receive its callback too soon (#2935).

Last `md_page` index is now correctly tracked during a resize (#2932).

### env

Huge-related options are now omitted when --no-huge specified (#2973).

### idxd

Fixed maybe-uninitialized compilation warnings under gcc 12.2.1.

### miscellaneous

bdevperf is now calling `rand_r()` twice to get 64-bit values to ensure it's issuing I/O across the
full range of the bdev.

### nvme

The destination port is now checked before parsing address in the TCP transport to keep the behavior
the same across Linux and FreeBSD due to differences in `getaddrinfo()` when port exceeds 65535
(#2936).

The `numd` field in the Reservation Report command is now filled as a 0 based value in accordance
with the NVMe spec.

Fixed `nvme_qpair_abort_all_queued_reqs()` not being called for the admin queue in the PCIe
transport (#2928).

PCIe transport now calls `transport_ctrlr_disconnect_qpair_done()` if `ctrlr_disable_poll()` fails,
e.g. if the drive is unresponsive (#2931).

RDMA and TCP transports are now correctly initializing `cpl->sqid` when aborting requests (#2930).

Corrected reporting max SGE supported by the TCP transport to avoid unnecessarily splitting
requests.

### nvmf

Fixed issue with aborting TCP requests awaiting R2T ACK leading to terminating the connection
(#2789).

Deprecated `cb_fn` argument in `spdk_nvmf_qpair_disconnect()` and updated it to return
`-EINPROGRESS` when a qpair is already being disconnected.

All trid fields are now initialized by `spdk_nvmf_qpair_get_*_trid()`. This fixed issue with active
qpairs not getting disconnected after a listener is removed via `nvmf_subsystem_remove_listener`
(#2595, #2862, #2864, #2865).

### rpc

Fixed the type of `rr-min-io parameter` in `bdev_nvme_set_multipath_policy` RPC to be an integer.

### vhost

Renamed `rte_vhost_slave_config_change()` to `rte_vhost_backend_config_change()` due to changes in
DPDK.


Many thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
