---
layout: post
title:  "Fuzz testing SPDK"
author: Sebastian Brzezinka
categories: news
---

Fuzzing is a software testing technique that incorporates feeding random, unexpected input
to a computer program to test unexpected paths of software execution. The SPDK project uses
two approaches to fuzz testing:

* Brute force randomization of inputs

* LLVM coverage-guided randomization

# NVMe fuzz

The SPDK fuzzer application tries to fuzz the NVMe-oF target or a physical NVMe drive by submitting
randomized NVMe commands through the SPDK NVMe initiator. To achieve this, NVMe commands are
sent through the `spdk_nvme_ctrlr_cmd_io_raw` interface, or in the case of admin commands
`spdk_nvme_ctrlr_cmd_admin_raw`. The data in those commands is completely random,
generated using the current time as a seed.

This application saves generated commands in a JSON formatted file that allows for further
debugging. But using random input has some drawbacks: the fuzzer can spend lots of time testing
inputs that do not increase coverage and even after a long run, there may still be code paths left
untested.

For more information take a look at `test/app/fuzz/nvme_fuzz/README.md`

# LLVM libfuzzer

To overcome this issue, another tool to fuzz test SPDK apps is used. LibFuzzer is a coverage guided
fuzzer that comes from the LLVM project. Every input sent to SPDK is also tested against code
coverage data to see if it increased. If a random input increases code coverage, it is saved and
used as the basis for further mutation, allowing to check nodes placed deeper in the execution tree
and to save time on testing inputs that can be rejected early.

## llvm_nvme_fuzz

Similar to `nvme_fuzz` this application submits NVMe commands through the SPDK NVMe initiator,
but this time random input is provided by `LLVMFuzzerRunDriver` and used to perform the chosen test
defined in `g_fuzzers` array.

```
sudo CC=clang-13 CXX=clang++-13 ./configure --with-fuzzer='/usr/lib/llvm-13/lib/clang/13.0.1/lib/linux/libclang_rt.fuzzer_no_main-x86_64.a'
sudo ./test/fuzz/llvm/nvmf/run.sh 1
```

Since LibFuzzer is a part of the LLVM project, to compile this application, it's necessary
to set `CC` and `CXX` variables to clang and provide the path to the fuzzer library.

## llvm_vfio_fuzz

The LLVM fuzzer is also used to test the `vfio-user` transport. This application sends
unexpected input to mimic misbehaving and/or malicious virtual machines using the
`spdk_vfio_user_pci_bar_access` interface.

```
sudo CC=clang-13 CXX=clang++-13 ./configure --with-fuzzer='/usr/lib/llvm-13/lib/clang/13.0.1/lib/linux/libclang_rt.fuzzer_no_main-x86_64.a' --with-vfio-user
sudo ./test/fuzz/llvm/vfio/run.sh 1
```

# Running fuzz tests

An important advantage of the LLVM fuzzer is the corpus file. Each random input generated
by the fuzzer that explores a new path is saved, allowing resumption of testing from the point
where it was stopped and avoiding lost progress.

First existing data from a corpus is processed to check if it is still valid and then fuzzing
continues from the last random input. It is also possible to provide predetermined data to recreate
issues found by the fuzzer or to start from valid samples.

The SPDK CI system has two jobs, `long-fuzz-nvmf` and `long-fuzz-vfio` that utilize persistent
corpus files.

This way every run is a continuation of the previous one, continually increasing code coverage,
which can be observed by looking at coverage data expose in the job artifacts.

To try it for yourself just set `SPDK_TEST_FUZZER` and all tests should start in parallel.
```
sudo SPDK_TEST_FUZZER=1 ./test/fuzz/llvm/vfio/run.sh 1
```

For more information about LLVM Fuzzer please visit
[LibFuzzer](https://llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html#using-libfuzzer-as-a-library)

Thanks for reading!
