---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v24.01: DIF in accel, RAID rebuild, Blobstore grow"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 24.01 LTS](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v24.01)!!
The SPDK 24.01 release is a long term support release that will be supported for 1 year.

This release contains the following new features:

 - **DIF operations in accel**: Accel now supports verify, generate and generate copy operations for computing Data Integrity Field (DIF). Currently supported by software and DSA accel modules.
 - **RAID rebuild**: RAID bdev module supports rebuild for RAID1 and RAID5F levels.
 - **Blobstore grow in runtime**: Blobstore now supports increasing it's size to fill the underlying device without the need to close all blobs. This functionality extends to logical volumes.
 - **NVMe CUSE enabled by default**: NVMe CUSE is no longer considered experimental and enabled by default. It allows creation of NVMe device nodes in Linux kernel for the controller and namespaces (i.e. at /dev/nvmeXnY). These character devices can be used by tools such as nvme-cli.


The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v24.01).
Deprecation notices for users updating from previous releases can be found [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/v24.01/deprecation.md).

# New Contributors

This release contains 568 commits from 53 authors with over 34k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

 - Abhineet Pandey
 - Anton Nayshtut
 - Changqi Lu
 - Deepak Abraham Tom
 - Haoqian He
 - Hollin
 - Igor Vechirko
 - Kanika Nema
 - Karl Bonde Torp
 - Lukasz Lasek
 - Marcin Suski
 - Philipp Riederer
 - Sarvesh Lanke
 - Vasilii Ivanov
 - Xiaoguang Wang
 - Yoav Cohen

Many thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
