---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v24.05: NVMe in-band authentication, keyring lib,  blob shallow copy"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community I'm pleased to announce the release of [SPDK 24.05](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v24.05)!!

This release contains the following new features:

 - **NVMe In-Band Authentication**: NVMe driver and NVMe-oF target now supports DH-HMAC-CHAP protocol for in-band authentication.
 - **Keyring Library**: New library responsible for providing access to cryptographic keys. The module interface is pluggable with `keyring_file` and `keyring_linux` modules implemented.
 - **Blobstore Shallow Copy**: Enables copying of read-only blobs such that only allocated clusters are written on the device. This functionality extends to logical volumes.
 - **DIF Operations in Accel**: Accel now supports verify-copy operation for Data Integrity Field (DIF) computation. Supported by software and DSA accel modules.
 - **NVMe-oF mDNS Pull Registration Requests**: Support added for mDNS-based discovery of NVMe-oF target for TCP transport.
 - **RAID1 I/O Error Handling**: RAID1 can now recover from I/O errors when redundancy permits.


The full changelog for this release is available [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v24.05).
Deprecation notices for users updating from previous releases can be found [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/v24.05/deprecation.md).

# New Contributors

This release contains 728 commits from 66 authors with over 39k lines of code changed.

We'd especially like to recognize all of our first time contributors:

 - Atul Malakar
 - Diwakar Sharma
 - Krzysztof Goreczny
 - Kyuho Son
 - Moshe Shahar
 - Olivier Mayer
 - Pierre Bouvier
 - Xupeng Mingtu
 - Yash Raj Singh
 - Yongjin Lee
 - Zhangfei Gao
 - Zhang Hongtao

Many thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
