---
layout: post
title:  "SPDK v25.09: NVMe 1.4 support in NVMe-oF target, NVMe-oF NSSR"
author: Tomasz Zawadzki
categories: release
---

On behalf of the SPDK community, I'm proud to announce the release of
[SPDK v25.09](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v25.09)!

This release brings several major features and improvements:
 - **NVMe 1.4 support for NVMe-oF target**: SPDK NVMe-oF target now supports all required NVMe 1.4 features.
 - **NVMe-oF NSSR support**: Added NVMe Subsytem Reset to NVMe-oF target, see (nvmf documentation)[https://spdk.io/doc/nvmf.html] for more information.
 - **NVMe-oF optimal and preferred I/O sizes**: SPDK NVMe-oF target now reports preferred write and unmap alignments, preferred write and unmap granularity, and optimal write size, for bdevs that provide this information.
 - **Block device optimal and preferred I/O sizes**: SPDK bdev layer and the nvme bdev module now report optimal and preferred I/O sizes for write and unmap commands.
 - **DPDK 25.07**: SPDK's DPDK submodule was updated to the DPDK 25.07 release.
 - **Read-only Ceph RBD bdevs**: SPDK's bdev_rbd module now supports read-only bdevs.
 - **Improved NVMe driver logging**: Logging in the nvme driver was significantly improved to provide more information about controllers and queue pairs.
 - **Improved Python code packaging**: Python CLI-related code was refactored to make it easier to package SPDK's Python code.

This release contains fix (8981ddb1) for (CVE-2025-57275)[https://www.cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2025-57275].

You can view the full changelog [here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/releases/tag/v25.09).
Deprecation notices for users upgrading from previous releases are available
[here](https://github.com/spdk/spdk/blob/v25.09/deprecation.md).

# New Contributors

This release includes **374 commits** from **61 authors**, with over **48k lines of code** changed.

We'd especially like to recognize our first-time contributors:
 - Avri Altman
 - Pravin M Bathija
 - Liu Cheng
 - Dor Deri
 - Colin Dorsey
 - Amit Engel
 - Ori Evron
 - Vladislav Fedyaev
 - Kou Jiawei
 - Jinhong Kim
 - Karol Kolacinski
 - Andrey Korzinev
 - Fedor Kukso
 - Zhipeng Li
 - Brian Meagher
 - Jiri Novak
 - Omar Pakker
 - Huang Shijie
 - Ramkumar S
 - Mingbao Sun
 - Mariusz Tkaczyk
 - Evan Webster
 - Przemyslaw Wielgo
 - Tomas Winkler

Many thanks to everyone for your contributions, participation, and effort!
